                                 HHS Public Access
                                 Author manuscript
                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
Author Manuscript




                    Published in final edited form as:
                     Int Conf Learn Represent. 2025 April ; 2025: 95458–95477.



                    Mixture of Experts Made Personalized: Federated Prompt
                    Learning for Vision-Language Models
                    Jun Luo,
                    Intelligent Systems Program, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

                    Chen Chen,
                    Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL 32816, USA
Author Manuscript




                    Shandong Wu
                    Intelligent Systems Program, Department of Radiology, Department of Biomedical Informatics,
                    Department of Bioengineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

                    Abstract
                         Federated prompt learning benefits federated learning with CLIP-like Vision-Language Model’s
                         (VLM’s) robust representation learning ability through prompt learning. However, current
                         federated prompt learning methods are habitually restricted to the traditional FL paradigm, where
                         the participating clients are generally only allowed to download a single globally aggregated
                         model from the server. While justifiable for training full-sized models under federated settings,
                         in this work, we argue that this paradigm is ill-suited for lightweight prompts. By facilitating
Author Manuscript




                         the clients to download multiple pre-aggregated prompts as fixed non-local experts, we propose
                         Personalized Federated Mixture of Adaptive Prompts (pFedMoAP), a novel FL framework
                         that personalizes the prompt learning process through the lens of Mixture of Experts (MoE).
                         pFedMoAP implements a local attention-based gating network that learns to generate enhanced text
                         features for better alignment with local image data, benefiting from both local and downloaded
                         non-local adaptive prompt experts. Extensive experiments on 9 datasets under various federated
                         settings demonstrate the efficacy of the proposed pFedMoAP algorithm. The code is available at
                         https://github.com/ljaiverson/pFedMoAP.


                    1    Introduction
                                      Recent years have witnessed the prosperity of federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al.,
Author Manuscript




                                      2017; Kairouz et al., 2019; Li et al., 2020a) as a potent paradigm for training machine
                                      learning models across decentralized data sources. While offering a privacy-preserving
                                      solution in collaborative training settings, this approach faces a critical challenge in the
                                      form of heterogeneous data distribution across the participating clients (Li et al., 2020a).
                                      And due to the data heterogeneity, the generalization capabilities of the trained models



                    jul117@pitt.edu .
                    Ethics Statement. The research presented in this paper adheres to the ICLR Code of Ethics. Our study does not involve human
                    or animal subjects. Every dataset used in our study is publicly available. Our method does not address discrimination/bias/fairness
                    concerns.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                             Page 2


                                  may be compromised (Li et al., 2020b; Sahu et al., 2018). In this context, the pre-trained
Author Manuscript




                                  Vision-Language Models (VLMs) such as CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) and ALIGN (Jia et
                                  al., 2021) can provide a significant impact with their remarkable applications in learning
                                  transferable representations across a wide range of tasks and disparate data distributions
                                  encountered in federated settings.

                                  However, applying VLMs in FL contexts is not without challenges. Due to their millions
                                  of parameters, fine-tuning these large-scale models in federated settings incurs prohibitively
                                  high communication overhead, making it impractical for many real-world applications. This
                                  limitation has led researchers to explore more efficient adaptation techniques for VLMs,
                                  with prompt learning emerging as a promising approach to overcome the communication
                                  bottleneck.

                                  Prompt learning for VLMs (Zhou et al., 2022b), originally proposed to eliminate the need
Author Manuscript




                                  for hand-crafted prompts, replaces the context words with small-scale learnable vectors
                                  while keeping the pre-trained model fixed. Such a lightweight approach particularly benefits
                                  FL by tremendously reducing the communication overhead associated with transmitting the
                                  entire fine-tuned model. For instance, PromptFL (Guo et al., 2023b) leverages a FedAvg
                                  (McMahan et al., 2017) style aggregation of the locally trained prompts. FedPR (Feng et
                                  al., 2023) learns the visual prompt within the null space of the global prompt. In addition,
                                  recent criticism on prompt-based VLMs to unseen data distributions (Zhou et al., 2022b;
                                  Khattak et al., 2023a;b) also facilitates FL researchers to combine prompt learning with
                                  personalized FL (PFL). Instead of restricting to the global consensus model, PFL (Tan
                                  et al., 2022; Kulkarni et al., 2020) allows tailored models for each individual client,
                                  systemically mitigating the data heterogeneity issues and enhancing the overall flexibility
                                  of the system. However, directly applying PFL techniques, such as local fine-tuning (Cheng
Author Manuscript




                                  et al., 2021) and personalizing specific layers (Arivazhagan et al., 2019), to prompt learning
                                  has demonstrated limited efficacy in training the prompt (Guo et al., 2023b) under extreme
                                  data heterogeneity. Consequently, some works tailor PFL techniques to prompt learning
                                  in CLIP-like VLMs. In this recently emerged field, Guo et al. (2023a) trains a global
                                  consensus prompt with personalized visual attention modules on locally memorized data.
                                  Li et al. (2024) leverages unbalanced Optimal Transport to align visual feature maps with
                                  personalized prompts. More details on prior works are presented in Appendix A.

                                  Unfortunately, existing federated prompt learning approaches habitually adhere to the
                                  paradigm of traditional FL/PFL techniques, wherein the participating clients are
                                  generally only allowed to download a single globally aggregated model from the server.
                                  While justifiable for full-sized models, we argue that this paradigm is ill-suited for
Author Manuscript




                                  federated prompt learning, as the significantly reduced size of prompts substantially
                                  mitigates the potential communication overhead. To contextualize this disparity, consider
                                  that while a typical ResNet50 model contains approximately 25.6 million parameters,
                                  a learnable prompt with length 16 and dimension 512 comprises merely 16 × 512 =
                                  8, 192 parameters — a reduction of three orders of magnitude. Given this significant
                                  parameter reduction, restricting clients to downloading only a single globally aggregated
                                  model — as in traditional FL/PFL — unnecessarily limits federated prompt learning. The
                                  lightweight nature of prompts provides a unique way for more flexible and effective


                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                               Page 3


                                  personalization strategies. Therefore, this motivates us to address the following pivotal
Author Manuscript




                                  question:

                                           How can we devise a personalized federated learning framework, tailored for prompt
                                           learning in CLIP-like VLMs, while fully exploiting the lightweight nature of the
                                           prompts?

                                  In light of these challenges and opportunities, we propose a novel framework: Personalized
                                  Federated Mixture of Adaptive Prompts (pFedMoAP). Tailored specifically for prompt
                                  learning in CLIP-like VLMs, our proposed framework aims to unleash the potential of the
                                  lightweight prompt by allowing the clients to download multiple pre-aggregated prompts
                                  (see Fig. 1b) to acquire collective knowledge. In this manner, we enhance the generalization
                                  capabilities of the PFL system under extreme data heterogeneity, offering a more flexible
                                  and effective solution that fully leverages the lightweight nature of prompts in federated
                                  settings.
Author Manuscript




                                  At its core, pFedMoAP personalizes the federated prompt learning problem through the lens
                                  of Mixture of Experts (MoE), treating all locally updated prompts as specialized experts.
                                  Benefiting from lifting the aforementioned ill-suited restriction, pFedMoAP facilitates the
                                  sharing of pre-aggregated prompts between clients (through the server). In addition, our
                                  proposed framework implements a novel client-specific, parameter-efficient, attention-based
                                  gating network that learns to generate enhanced text features for better alignment with local
                                  image data on each client. Through this locally trained gating network, the enhanced text
                                  features are generated from the adaptive local and non-local prompt experts via CLIP’s
                                  text encoder. The local expert is trained exclusively with the client’s data, while non-local
                                  experts, trained on other clients, are sparsely selected from a server-maintained pool based
                                  on K nearest neighbors (KNN), and shared with the client without aggregation, fostering
Author Manuscript




                                  collective knowledge sharing across clients beyond the global aggregation.

                                  We summarize our main contributions as follows:

                                       •       We pioneer a paradigm shift in federated prompt learning for VLMs by
                                               challenging the restriction on sharing pre-aggregated prompts between clients.
                                               Circumventing this ill-suited restriction for prompt learning unlocks more
                                               potential inherent in the lightweight prompts, facilitating more effective cross-
                                               client knowledge sharing. As such, we pave the way for more flexible federated
                                               prompt learning in VLMs.

                                       •       We propose pFedMoAP, a novel framework designed specifically for
                                               personalizing federated prompt learning in CLIP-like VLMs under data
Author Manuscript




                                               heterogeneity for image recognition tasks. pFedMoAP personalizes the prompt
                                               learning with a unique attention-based gating network. Thanks to its flexibility,
                                               this gating network has the potential to extend beyond federated learning for
                                               prompt-based VLMs.

                                       •       We validate the effectiveness of the proposed pFedMoAP through extensive
                                               experiments and ablation studies across 9 widely adopted datasets under various




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                               Page 4


                                                     federated settings. The results verify the superiority of pFedMoAP over compared
Author Manuscript




                                                     state-of-the-art methods.


                       2         Preliminaries
                       2.1       Personalized federated learning
                                        Conventional federated learning (FL) aims to train a global consensus model for a federation
                                        of clients with similar data. As the most notable FL algorithm, FedAvg (McMahan et al.,
                                        2017) minimizes the global objective over N clients defined as:

                                                                                               N
                                                                                   minF (θ) =     piF i(θ),
                                                                                    θ         i=1

                                                                                                                                      (1)
Author Manuscript




                                        where θ and F i( ⋅ ) represents the global model and the local objective of client i,
                                        respectively, and the weight pi is often set as pi = ni /n with n =          i ni where ni denotes the
                                        number of data samples on client i. In FedAvg, the local objective F i( ⋅ ) measures client
                                                                ni
                                        i’s empirical loss,     k = 1 ℒi θ ∣ xk, yk   , where ℒi represents its loss and xk is its k-th data
                                        sample with ground truth label yk.

                                        Compared to conventional FL, personalized FL (PFL) relaxes the number of models where
                                        each client i is allowed to have its tailored model θi. The goal of PFL is, therefore, defined
                                        as:
Author Manuscript




                                                                                                          N
                                                                         min    F θ1, …, θN =     min         piF i θi .
                                                                      θ1, …, θN               θ1, …, θN i = 1

                                                                                                                                      (2)



                       2.2       Prompt learning for CLIP-like VLMs
                                        To efficiently adapt pre-trained CLIP-like VLMs to downstream tasks, prompt learning
                                        methods (Zhou et al., 2022b;a) model a prompt’s context words with learnable vectors.
                                        While zero-shot transfer of CLIP leverages the fixed word embedding W = w1, …, wl
                                        from hand-crafted prompt templates with l context words (e.g. “a photo of a <class>.”),
                                        prompt learning replace it with the learnable prompt P = p1, …, pl ∈ ℝl × d where d is the
                                        dimension of the word embedding. The full prompt P (c), consisting of the learnable prompt
Author Manuscript




                                        P with the embedding of a class label c, is then fed into the fixed text encoder, g( ⋅ ). Together
                                        with the fixed image encoder f( ⋅ ), the classification logit for class c is then computed as
                                        a matching score between the image and text features. And the prediction probability of
                                        each class for image x is derived by taking a Softmax, controlled by temperature τ, over the
                                        logits:




                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                        Page 5



                                                                                 logit(c) = sim f(x), g P (c) ,
Author Manuscript




                                                                                                                              (3)




                                                                                               exp logit c /τ
                                                                             py=c∣x =                               ,
                                                                                            ∑k = 1 exp logit k /τ
                                                                                              C



                                                                                                                              (4)



                                        where sim( ⋅ ) denotes a metric function (e.g. cosine similarity), ŷ is the predicted label, and
                                        C denotes the number of classes. With the probabilities, we can learn the prompt P by
                                        minimizing the cross-entropy loss.
Author Manuscript




                       2.3       Mixture of Experts
                                        With a similar form to FL’s, Mixture of Experts (MoE) aggregates the output of multiple
                                        experts or trained models, instead of the model parameters. For a general MoE system with
                                        N experts, the output of MoE with input x is defined as:

                                                                                             N
                                                                                MoE(x) =          G(x)i ⋅ Ei(x),
                                                                                            i=1

                                                                                                                              (5)



                                        where Ei( ⋅ ) represents the i-th expert, and G( ⋅ )i represents the weight assigned to the
Author Manuscript




                                        output of expert i from a N dimensional vector, based on its input. The mechanism for
                                        weight assignment is often controlled by a network called gating network (also known as
                                        a router). The implementation of the gating network varies (Clark et al., 2022; Hazimeh et
                                        al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022c), but a simple yet effective one is implemented by taking the
                                        Softmax over top-K(K ≤ N) logits of a linear layer with the remaining N − K weights set to
                                        zero (Shazeer et al., 2017). We propose a novel lightweight attention-based gating network
                                        devised for CLIP-like VLMs that extends beyond federated learning. Details are presented in
                                        Sec. 3.3.


                       3         Personalized Federated Mixture of Adaptive Prompts
                       Motivation.
Author Manuscript




                                        While federated prompt learning for pre-trained CLIP-like VLMs offers an approach to
                                        efficiently adapt these models to downstream tasks under federated settings, such methods
                                        mostly lack personalization for the prompt to generalize with extreme data heterogeneity.
                                        Prior PFL methods devised for prompt learning habitually adhere to the restriction for
                                        the clients to download only a single globally aggregated model from the server, failing
                                        to leverage the lightweight nature of the prompt to the fullest. In addition, from an MoE
                                        perspective, allowing clients to download pre-aggregated prompts trained on other clients



                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                          Page 6


                                        naturally provides a systemic solution to the dilemma where too many experts on the client
Author Manuscript




                                        incurs prohibitively high communication overhead while too few experts impairs the benefit
                                        of employing MoE. Consequently, there is a need for a tailored PFL approach for prompt
                                        learning in CLIP-like VLMs that offers the flexibility to share trained prompts from an MoE
                                        perspective.

                       Overview.
                                        The rest of this section presents the details of the pFedMoAP by gradually building upon
                                        PFL with prompt learning and mixture of adaptive prompts, and how the proposed attention-
                                        based gating network works in pFedMoAP, as well as potentials in extending it beyond
                                        federated learning.

                       3.1       Personalized federated prompt learning with local prompt only
Author Manuscript




                                        In our study, we presume each client hosts a CLIP model with fixed image encoder f( ⋅ )
                                        and text encoder g( ⋅ ) for image recognition tasks. We first suppose, in this subsection,
                                        that each client personalizes the local prompt without the MoE. At federated round t, each
                                        client i in the selected set of participating client St locally updates its prompt, P it, initialized
                                        with the global prompt from the last round, P gt − 1. The prompt is then updated through a
                                        gradient-based optimization, e.g. Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), over a cross-entropy
                                        loss for multiple local epochs.

                                        After finishing the local update, the learned prompts P i for all the clients in St are then
                                        aggregated by the server for a global prompt P gt in a FedAvg manner:

                                                                                                      ni
                                                                                  P gt =    ∑ ∑               P it .
                                                                                                    k ∈ St nk
Author Manuscript




                                                                                           i ∈ St

                                                                                                                                 (6)



                                        While P gt is used for the next round of training, for client i, P it is stored and used for inference
                                        purposes, achieving a simple personalization for federated prompt learning while MoE is not
                                        present.

                       3.2       Personalized Federated Mixture of Adaptive Prompts workflow
                                        Thanks to the lightweight nature of the prompt, clients are enabled to acquire collective
                                        knowledge beyond the globally aggregated prompt. In pFedMoAP, we facilitate, rather
                                        than discourage, each client to download K pre-aggregated prompts trained on other
Author Manuscript




                                        clients as non-local client experts. These non-local experts are sparsely selected from a
                                        server-maintained pool of prompt experts, P. The pool functions as a dynamic repository,
                                        refreshing at the conclusion of each federated round. It incorporates the newly acquired
                                        prompts from the clients who participated in the current training round, and overwrites their
                                        previous entries (if existing) in the pool, i.e:

                                                                      Pt = Pt − 1 − P it − 1 i ∈ Pt − 1 ∩ St + P jt j ∈ St .




                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                                            Page 7

                                                                                                                                                  (7)
Author Manuscript




                                          At the beginning of the current round t, each client i ∈ St is first assigned K non-local
                                          experts from the previous round’s pool, Pt − 1. This assignment is based on a K nearest
                                          neighbors (KNN) algorithm, which identifies the top-K nearest experts from client i’s entry
                                          in the pool, in terms of l2 distance1. the rationale behind the KNN-based expert assignment
                                          is that clients with similar locally trained prompts are more likely to share comparable
                                          data distributions. This similarity-based expert assignment aims to leverage knowledge
                                          from clients with potentially similar data characteristics, enhancing the personalization from
                                          closer collaborators in terms of local data distributions.

                                          While such a server-side assignment of the non-local experts inherently simulates the sparse
                                          gating in MoE, a client-side gating network, Gi( ⋅ ), enables dynamic dense incorporation of
Author Manuscript




                                          the output from all selected experts on a per-image basis (see Fig. 2).
                                                             K
                                          Let Qi = NLj j = 1 (NL represents “Non-Local”) be the set of clients assigned to client i,
                                          whose prompts, P NLj, are served as non-local experts on client i. Before the local training of
                                          client i initiates, text features for every non-local prompt are computed via the CLIP’s fixed
                                          text encoder, g( ⋅ ). Note that since the non-local prompt experts are kept fixed throughout the
                                                                                                                              (c)
                                          local training, these text features are only necessary to be computed once. Let T NL    j be the

                                          text features for class c generated by the j-th non-local prompt expert on client i with class
                                                             (c)                                                                             (c)
                                          c’s embedding, P NL    j. At the beginning of the local training on client i, the text features, T NL,

                                          from every non-local expert for every class c ∈ C , formulated below, are fixed and ready to
                                          use for the entire local training process:
Author Manuscript




                                                                                   (c)     (c)       (c)       (c)
                                                                        ∀c ∈ C , T NL  ≜ T NL  j ∣ T NLj = g P NLj , ∀NLj ∈ Qi .


                                                                                                                                                  (8)



                                          In pFedMoAP, a novel attention-based gating network, G ⋅ ∣ θi parameterized by θi, is
                                          proposed. Unlike the G( ⋅ ) in Eq. (5), the proposed gating network functions to generate
                                          a mixture of the outputs from the experts, instead of the weights for the outputs
                                          in traditional MoE. The weights, however, are still internally computed as intermediate
                                          products through the attention mechanism. We discuss the gating network in details in Sec.
                                          3.3. Let Ik = f xk be the computed image feature of the input image xk through CLIP’s
                                          fixed image encoder f( ⋅ ). In pFedMoAP, for each class c ∈ C , what the gating network,
                                          G ⋅ ∣ θi , takes as input are three-fold: 1) image feature, Ik; 2) text features from the locally
Author Manuscript




                                          updated prompt expert T L(c) = g P i(c) where L represents “Local”; and 3) text features from the
                                                                    (c)
                                          all non-local experts, T NL   defined in Eq. (8). The gating network then outputs the enhanced
                                                          (c)
                                          text feature, T MoE, better aligned with the image feature Ik for more generalizability that
                                          incorporates both collective knowledge and personalization, i.e.,


                       1The first-time participants with no entry in the pool conduct a standard local training of the global prompt, and upload its trained
                       prompt to the pool.


                                        Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                                   Page 8


                                                                                        (c)
                                                                             ∀c ∈ C , T MoE                   (c)
                                                                                            ≜ G Ik, T L(c), T NL  ∣ θi .
Author Manuscript




                                                                                                                                          (9)



                                        Note that although the gating network could technically be parameterized in a class-specific
                                        manner, our implementation opts to use a shared set of parameters across all classes for
                                        parameter efficiency.

                                        As the final step, pFedMoAP computes the logits based on the matching score between the
                                                                                                      (c)
                                        image feature Ik and text features from two sources, namely T MoE from the MoE, and T L(c)
                                                                           (c)
                                        from the local expert. Although T MoE  carries the global collective knowledge, we further
                                                  (c)
                                        address T L with weight λ as the local prompt P i is the only learnable expert on the client,
                                        i.e.,
Author Manuscript




                                                                     ∀c ∈ C , logit(c) = sim Ik, T MoE
                                                                                                   (c)
                                                                                                       + λ ⋅ sim Ik, T L(c) .

                                                                                                                                          (10)



                                        With the classification logits, the local prompt P i and the parameter θi in the gating
                                        network are updated through optimizing over the cross-entropy loss based on the prediction
                                        probability computed as in Eq. (4). After the local training, client i upload P i to the server
                                        while maintaining the gating network locally.

                       3.3       Attention-based gating network: in pFedMoAP and beyond
                                        To generate enhanced text features that better aligns with the image feature Ik, the proposed
Author Manuscript




                                        gating network employs a multi-head attention (MHA) layer (Vaswani, 2017) with the query
                                                                                                                   (c)
                                        being the Ik, while the key and the value are both text features T L(c), T NL       (c)       (c)
                                                                                                                       1, T NL2, …, T NLK .

                                        However, since the dimension of these features are usually large, resulting in too many
                                        parameters in the MHA layer (e.g. for CLIP with a ResNet50 backbone, dfeature = 1024,
                                        MHA layer will have 4.2M parameters), we force each feature to first go through a pooling
                                        layer to reduce the dimension to a fixed dgating = 128 (MHA layer will only have 66.0K
                                                                                                                (c)
                                        parameters). Therefore, with Q = Pooling Ik , K = V = Pooling T L(c), T NL  and ℎ being then
                                        number of heads, we have:

                                                           (c)
                                                         T MoE                   (c)
                                                               = G Ik, T L(c), T NL  ∣ θi = MHA(Q, K, V ) = Concat head1, …, headℎ W O,

                                                                                                                                          (11)
Author Manuscript




                                        where headq = Attention QW qQ, KW qK, V W qV and W O, W qQ, W qK, W qV are standard MHA
                                                                      d
                                                               (c)
                                        parameters in θi. As T MoE ∈ ℝ gating, computing sim Ik, T MoE
                                                                                                   (c)
                                                                                                       requires pooling on Ik as well.

                                        While a linear projection-based gating network, Gproj( ⋅ ), in a typical MoE is also able
                                        to achieve enhanced text features for CLIP (e.g. by assigning weights Gproj xk ∈ ℝK + 1


                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                      Page 9


                                        for the experts’ output based on the image input (Shazeer et al., 2017)), the proposed
Author Manuscript




                                        attention-based gating network is more favorable for the following FL-agnostic reasons.
                                        1) Since the experts are constantly adapting during the training process, directly learning
                                        the assigned weights for the experts, as in projection-based gating, will be less robust than
                                        learning the relationship between the image feature and the text features generated by the
                                        experts, as in attention-based gating. 2) The output of the proposed attention-based gating
                                        is the enhanced text features, which makes the MHA layer serve as a lightweight linear
                                        probing with a much larger search space, that functions beyond assigning K + 1 weights to
                                        aggregate the experts’ output as a linear combination in a K + 1-dimensional search space.
                                        Even with a redesigned projection layer to directly produce the enhanced text features, the
                                        parameter count of such a projection-based gating network would substantially exceed that
                                        of the attention-based gating network. 3) A projection-based gating network fails to leverage
                                        the pre-trained CLIP’s powerful capability to align text features with image features, while
Author Manuscript




                                        the attention mechanism naturally harnesses it through the scaled dot-product operation. 4)
                                        Even if we feed both image and text features from multiple experts into a projection-based
                                        gating network, the order of these input would affect the final output in an uncontrollable
                                        way. And the number of experts has to be fixed for a projection-based gating network.
                                        In contrast, the proposed attention-based gating network is order-agnostic with a flexible
                                        number of experts it engages with. In pFedMoAP, while we fix the number of non-local
                                        experts on each client to be K , in practice, K can be client-specific based on the client’s
                                        memory and communication bandwidth.

                                        As such, our design of the attention-based gating network extends beyond federated
                                        learning. This versatile network could be adapted to general prompt learning for VLMs
                                        where multiple prompts are trained, such as multi-task learning or domain adaptation. We
                                        anticipate that our work will inspire future research exploring the broader applications of
Author Manuscript




                                        mixture of adaptive prompts for VLMs. The detailed pFedMoAP algorithm can be found in
                                        Algorithm 1.


                       4         Experiments
                       4.1       Experimental setup
                                        Dataset and data heterogeneity. We evaluate the efficacy of the proposed pFedMoAP
                                        with 9 public benchmark datasets under various federated settings to simulate different
                                        types of data heterogeneity. Following previous research (Guo et al., 2023b), to evaluate
                                        pFedMoAP under label heterogeneity, we adopt 5 representative visual classification datasets
                                        used to evaluate CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), namely OxfordPets Parkhi et al. (2012),
                                        Flowers102 Nilsback & Zisserman (2008), DTD Cimpoi et al. (2014), Caltech101 Fei-
Author Manuscript




                                        Fei (2004), Food101 Bossard et al. (2014). We refer to these datasets collectively as
                                        CLIP datasets. On these datasets, we test pFedMoAP’s few-shot performance under label
                                        heterogeneity by employing a pathological non-IID setting, where the classes are evenly
                                        distributed to the clients with no overlapping classes between any two clients. In addition,
                                        we use CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 dataset (Gong et al., 2012) and a Dirichlet distribution
                                        with Dir(α = 0.5) to simulate the label shift (Hsu et al., 2019). The Dirichlet distribution with
                                        α = 0 represents an extreme case where each client has only one class and larger α simulates


                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                  Page 10


                                        a stratified and even split of labels. Dir(α = 0.5) is on the more heterogeneous side. For
Author Manuscript




                                        feature heterogeneity, we adopt DomainNet dataset (Peng et al., 2019) and Office-Caltech10
                                        dataset (Gong et al., 2012), with 6 and 4 inherent domains, respectively. To add on extra
                                        heterogeneity, for DomainNet and Office-Caltech10, we split each domain with Dir(α = 0.3)
                                        for extra label heterogeneity, mimicking real-world FL settings with both label and feature
                                        shifts.

                                        Compared baselines. We compare our approach with three categories of baselines. The
                                        first category is local methods, where the clients do not participate in a FL setting. This
                                        category includes zero-shot CLIP (ZS-CLIP) (Radford et al., 2021) employing prompt
                                        templates: “a photo of a <class>“, and CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b) with learnable prompt
                                        vectors trained locally on each client. The second category comprises existing federated
                                        prompt learning methods, which include PromptFL (Guo et al., 2023b), which learns a
Author Manuscript




                                        unified prompt across clients, pFedPrompt (Guo et al., 2023a), which learns a shared
                                        prompt with personalized visual attention modules on locally memorized data, and FedOTP
                                        (Li et al., 2024), which leverages unbalanced Optimal Transport to align visual feature maps
                                        with personalized prompts. The third category consists of adapted methods from traditional
                                        FL/PFL techniques on PromptFL, namely FT (Cheng et al., 2021), FedProx Li et al.
                                        (2020b), FedPer (Arivazhagan et al., 2019), and FedAMP (Huang et al., 2021).

                       Implementation details.
                                        1) CLIP datasets. Each dataset in CLIP datasets is partitioned into N = 10 clients, each
                                        with a disjoint set of classes evenly and randomly assigned to the clients. The training
                                        proceeds for T = 10 rounds with r = 100 % participation rate. The CLIP uses a ResNet50
                                        backbone. 2) CIFAR10 & CIFAR100. N = 100 clients results from Dir(α = 0.5) partition
Author Manuscript




                                        with T = 120 rounds with r = 10 %. CLIP also uses a ResNet50 backbone. 3) DomainNet
                                        & Office-Caltech10. Each domain of these two datasets is partitioned to 5 clients with
                                        Dir(α = 0.3), resulting in N = 30 for DomainNet and N = 20 for Office-Caltech10. T = 25 for
                                        both datasets, while r = 25 % for DomainNet and r = 50 % for Office-Caltech10. The CLIP
                                        uses a ViT-b-16 backbone. 4) Training specs. For all methods, we use SGD as the optimizer
                                        with a learning rate of 0.002 and 5 local epochs (except COOp is locally trained for 25 epochs
                                        without FL). For pFedMoAP, we use SGD with a learning rate of 0.01 to train the ℎ = 8-head
                                        gating network and default λ = 0.5 in Eq. (10). A summary of the dataset setup can be found
                                        at Appendix C.1.

                       4.2       Performance evaluation
                                        We compute as the metric the average accuracy over every client’s private test set, drawn
Author Manuscript




                                        from the same distribution as its training set, and report the mean and standard deviation of
                                        all methods over three runs with different seeds.

                                        Evaluation on Label Shifts. To assess the performance of our method in handling
                                        label shifts, we conducted experiments on the CLIP datasets for few-shot training and
                                        CIFAR datasets for standard training. Tab. 1 shows the results on the CLIP datasets
                                        under a pathological non-IID setting, while Tab. 2 presents the results on CIFAR10


                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                Page 11


                                        and CIFAR100 with Dir(α = 0.5). On the CLIP datasets (Tab. 1), our proposed method
Author Manuscript




                                        pFedMoAP consistently outperforms other baselines across all five datasets, with significant
                                        margins over most methods, which proves the superiority of pFedMoAP. For instance,
                                        on the Flowers102 dataset, pFedMoAP achieves an accuracy of 98.41% with λ = 0.5,
                                        respectively 2.18% and 11.95% higher than FedOTP and pFedPrompt, the top 2 performant
                                        federated prompt learning methods, both recently proposed to achieve personalization
                                        through intermediate visual feature maps. Similar improvements can be observed across
                                        other datasets. Notably, on DTD dataset where zero-shot struggles to excel, pFedMoAP
                                        has little performance drop compared to personalized methods such as pFedPrompt and
                                        PromptFL+FedPer, showing pFedMoAP’s remarkable ability to adapt to diverse scenarios
                                        under few-shot settings. In addition, pFedMoAP with λ = 0.5 also beats λ = 0.0 over all
                                        datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of addressing the local prompt together with MoE.
                                        The results on CIFAR datasets (Tab. 2) further corroborate the efficacy of our method in
Author Manuscript




                                        handling extreme data heterogeneity with Dir(α = 0.5) over 100 clients. In this challenging
                                        scenario, pFedMoAP still consistently outperforms the compared baselines, reflecting the
                                        potency to handle label shifts by introducing non-local experts to the clients.

                                        Evaluation on Feature & Label Shifts. To evaluate the performance of our method in
                                        scenarios closer to real-world FL applications, we introduce feature shift on top of label
                                        shift via DomainNet and Office-Caltech10 where each domain is partitioned into 5 clients
                                        with Dir(α = 0.3), resulting in 30 and 20 total clients in DomainNet and Office-Caltech10,
                                        respectively. The results of these are presented in Tabs. 3 and 4, respectively. Under
                                        two types of heterogeneity, traditional federated learning methods struggle to benefit the
                                        clients. On average, the FedAvg style method PromptFL exhibits worse performance than
                                        the local training method CoOp by 12.51% and 8.96% respectively on DomainNet and
Author Manuscript




                                        Office-Caltech10. However, pFedMoAP remains better than local training and FL with up to
                                        5.94% accuracy boost under both types of heterogeneity. This validates the effectiveness and
                                        robustness of pFedMOAP in scenarios closer to real-world federated settings.

                       4.3       Ablation study
                                        Impact of number of shot. Following prior works (Li et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2023a),
                                        we investigate the impact of shots in the few-shot learning for pFedMoAP and other FL
                                        techniques implemented to prompt learning, namely PromptFL and PromptFL+FedProx,
                                        across the CLIP datasets. The number of shots varies from [1, 2, 4, 8, and 16]. As shown
                                        in Fig. 3, pFedMoAP consistently outperforms the other two methods across all datasets
                                        and shot numbers, demonstrating its superior effectiveness and robustness. While pFedMoAP
                                        outperforms the compared methods from only 1 shot, the gap between pFedMoAP and other
Author Manuscript




                                        methods widens as the number of shots increases. This demonstrates that pFedMoAP is
                                        particularly adept at leveraging additional training examples to enhance its performance, due
                                        to the introduction of MoE and the gating network. The trend of the curves also just that
                                        pFedMoAP has a more robust growth of performance when the number of shots increases,
                                        where the performances of the compared methods sometimes drop.




                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                                       Page 12


                                       Impact of λ, the coefficient for logit computed from local prompt. In pFedMoAP,
Author Manuscript




                                       λ balances the contribution between the logits generated from the local prompt and from
                                       MoE. Fig. 4 displays the results for λ values ranging from 0.0 to 5.0 across the CLIP
                                       datasets. The trends reveal that although the optimal λ value varies across datasets, a
                                       marginal address on the logits from the local prompt (e.g. λ = 0.5 or 1) can already reach
                                       near-best performance. The flat plateau also indicates that the balance between the logits
                                       generated from the local prompt and from MoE is easy to reach.

                                       In addition, Fig. 4 also demonstrate a disinclination of too little or too much address on
                                       the local prompt-generated logits. We attribute this to the fact that only the local prompt is
                                       being updated on a client among all the experts, while immoderately addressing it ignores
                                       the benefit from MoE.
Author Manuscript




                       5         Conclusion
                                       In this paper, we introduced pFedMoAP, a novel framework for personalized federated
                                       prompt learning in CLIP-like VLMs. Our approach leverages the lightweight nature of
                                       prompts to enable efficient cross-client knowledge sharing through a Mixture of Experts
                                       paradigm. By implementing a client-specific, attention-based gating network, pFedMoAP
                                       dynamically incorporates both local and non-local expert knowledge, striking a balance
                                       between personalization and collaborative learning. Extensive experiments across various
                                       datasets and federated settings demonstrate the superior performance of pFedMoAP
                                       compared to state-of-the-art alternatives, particularly in handling extreme data heterogeneity
                                       with label and/or feature shift. As federated learning continues to evolve, pFedMoAP
                                       represents a significant step forward in personalizing prompt learning for VLMs, opening
                                       new avenues for efficient and effective collaborative learning in privacy-preserving settings.
Author Manuscript




                       Acknowledgments
                                       This work was supported in part by a National Institutes of Health (NIH)/National Cancer Institute (NCI) grant
                                       (1R01CA218405), a NIH Other Transaction research contract 1OT2OD037972-01, the grant 1R01EB032896 (and a
                                       Supplement grant 3R01EB03 2896-03S1) as part of the National Science Foundation (NSF)/NIH Smart Health and
                                       Biomedical Research in the Era of Artificial Intelligence and Advanced Data Science Program, a NSF grant (CICI:
                                       SIVD: #2115082), an Amazon Machine Learning Research Award, and the University of Pittsburgh Momentum
                                       Funds (a scaling grant) for the Pittsburgh Center for AI Innovation in Medical Imaging. This work used Bridges-2
                                       at Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center through allocation [MED200006] from the Advanced Cyberin-frastructure
                                       Coordination Ecosystem: Services & Support (ACCESS) program, which is supported by NSF grants #2138259,
                                       #2138286, #2138307, #2137603, and #2138296. The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of
                                       the authors and should not be interpreted as representing official policies, either expressed or implied, of the NIH or
                                       NSF.


                       APPENDIX
Author Manuscript




                       A         Related work
                       Personalized federated learning.
                                       The mediocre performance of conventional federated learning (FL) (McMahan et al., 2017)
                                       over heterogeneous data calls for a more customized solution. Personalized federated
                                       learning (PFL) (Tan et al., 2022; Kulkarni et al., 2020), allowing tailored models for each



                                      Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                              Page 13


                                   client instead of a consensus model, systemically mitigates the data heterogeneity issue.
Author Manuscript




                                   Various strategies have been proposed to achieve personalization, including local fine-tuning
                                   (Cheng et al., 2021), different optimization techniques such as attentive message passing
                                   and regularization (Huang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2021a), and different personalized layers
                                   including feature extractor, classification head, attention, and batch normalization layers
                                   (Liang et al., 2020; Arivazhagan et al., 2019; Sun et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; 2021b). Some
                                   works use separate models to learn global and local knowledge, respectively (Cai et al.,
                                   2024; Deng et al., 2020). Some recent PFL works also switch gear to model heterogeneity
                                   (Xie et al., 2024; Yi et al., 2024a). While promising in addressing data heterogeneity, these
                                   methods primarily focus on traditional machine learning models and do not leverage the
                                   capabilities of large pre-trained vision-language models.

                       Federated prompt learning for pre-trained models.
Author Manuscript




                                   Prompt learning for pre-trained models combines models’ generalization capabilities
                                   and prompt learning’s flexibility in adapting these models to downstream tasks. As a
                                   fundamental work for this combination, CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b) models a prompt’s
                                   context words with learnable vectors in CLIP. Such a combination has quickly drawn the
                                   attention of the FL community. For instance, PromptFL (Guo et al., 2023b) does a FedAvg
                                   (McMahan et al., 2017) style global aggregation over the locally updated prompts. Building
                                   upon this, FedPR (Feng et al., 2023) learns federated visual prompts for MRI reconstruction,
                                   while Fed-DPT (Su et al., 2022) applies both visual and textual prompt tuning to facilitate
                                   domain adaptation over decentralized data. pFedprompt (Guo et al., 2023a) integrating
                                   global consensus prompt and local attention over stored few-shot data for each client.
                                   FedOTP (Li et al., 2024) and FedPGP (Cui et al., 2024) employ Optimal Transport and
                                   prompt-wise contrastive loss, respectively, between global and local prompts, capturing
Author Manuscript




                                   diverse category traits on a per-client basis. Pan et al. (2024) presents a theoretical analysis
                                   framework for prompt-based federated learning of vision-language models. However, these
                                   approaches habitually adhere to the paradigm where locally learned prompts are not allowed
                                   for inter-client sharing before aggregation. While sharing full models between clients would
                                   be impractical due to the massive communication costs −O N 2 ⋅ M per round when N
                                   models of size M are distributed to N clients (Luo & Wu, 2022; Luo et al., 2023) – sharing
                                   prompts is a different scenario. Since prompts are orders of magnitude smaller than full
                                   models (as shown in Fig. 1), the communication overhead becomes much more affordable.
                                   This makes it feasible for the inter-client sharing of pre-aggregated prompts under federated
                                   settings.

                       Federated learning with Mixture of Experts.
Author Manuscript




                                   From the proprietary GPT-4 (Achiam et al., 2023) to the open-sourced Mixtral of Experts
                                   8×7B (Jiang et al., 2024), Qwen1.5-MoE (Bai et al., 2023), Mixture of Experts (MoE)
                                   (Zhou et al., 2022c; Masoudnia & Ebrahimpour, 2014) is prevailing long after its initial
                                   proposal thanks to the recent heat in Large Language Models (LLMs). Its application in FL,
                                   however, dates back before LLMs. FedMix (Reisser et al., 2021) and FedJETs (Dun et al.,
                                   2023) allow each client to construct an MoE with a shared gating network, selecting specific
                                   non-local models more adaptive to the client’s local data for ensembling. PFL-MoE(Guo et


                                  Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                                            Page 14


                                       al., 2021) and pFedMoE (Yi et al., 2024b) incorporate the global aggregated model as the
Author Manuscript




                                       global expert and its locally fine-tuned model as a local expert to each client, achieving a
                                       personalized two-expert MoE. However, under federated settings, with too many experts on
                                       the client comes prohibitively high communication overhead (Reisser et al., 2021; Dun et al.,
                                       2023) while too few experts impairs the benefit of employing MoE.

                                       In contrast with the aforementioned methods, our proposed pFedMoAP, is a devised PFL
                                       method for prompt learning in CLIP-like VLMs. It sidesteps the impractical restriction on
                                       sharing the prompts without aggregation, while allowing a many-expert (e.g. 10 experts)
                                       MoE scenario for each client with negligible communication overhead, achieving efficient
                                       and effective personalization for the federated prompt learning.


                       B         PFedMoAP: The AlGORITHM
Author Manuscript




                                       We provide the overall algorithm of pFedMoAP below.


                                                                                              Algorithm 1
                                       pFedMoAP

                                        Input:N clients, learning rates η1, η2, number of rounds T , logit coefficient λ, CLIP image/text encoder f( ⋅ ), g( ⋅ ),
                                        datasets Di i ∈ [N]

                                        Output: Personalized prompts P 1, P 2, …, P N , gating network weights θ1, θ2, …, θN .

                                        ServerExecute:
                                                                                     0
                                        1:                     Server initialize P g and the pool of prompt experts P0 as an empty set

                                        2:                     Clients intialize θ1, θ2, …, θN .

                                                               fort      1, 2, …, T do
Author Manuscript




                                        3:

                                        4:                       Select a subset of St clients, St

                                        5:                       fori ∈ Stin parallel do

                                        6:                            if Client i does not have an entry in the server-maintained pool, Ptthen

                                        7:                              P it = ClientUpdate P gt − 1, standard = True)
                                        8:                            else
                                                                                                                     t
                                        9:                              Compute Qi by K nearest neighbor, given P i = Pt − 1[i].

                                        10:                             P NL = Pt − 1[j] j ∈ Qi// prompt in the pool from selected group of clients
                                        11:                             P it = ClientUpdate P gt − 1, P NL // downloaded as non-local experts
                                        12:                             Pt[i] = P it // cache to pool
Author Manuscript




                                        13:                           end if
                                        14:                           P gt = ∑i ∈ St piP it

                                        15:                      end for
                                        16:                    end for
                                                                             T   T       T
                                        17:                    returnP 1 , P 2 , …, P N and θ1, θ2, …, θN
                                                         t−1
                                        ClientUpdateP g     , P NL = None, standard=False):



                                      Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                                           Page 15
Author Manuscript




                                         1:                  P it      Pg
                                         2:                  if standard then
                                         3:                     client does a standard fine-tuning
                                         4:                  else
                                         5:                     for xk, yk    ∈ Dido
                                         6:                          T L = g P iT
                                         7:                          T NL = g P NL
                                         8:                          Ik = f xk
                                         9:                          T MoE = G Ik, T L, T NL ∣ θi
                                         10:                         logit = sim Ik, T MoE + λ ⋅ sim Ik, T L
Author Manuscript




                                         11:                         p y = c ∣ xk = Softmax(logit, τ) // τ is the temperature
                                         12:                         ℒce = − ∑c yk(c)P y = c ∣ xk
                                         13:                    end for
                                         14:                 end if
                                                                        t
                                         15:                 returnP i



                       C         Additional experiments
                       C. 1       Details of dataset setup
                                        We follow the most recent prompt-based FL for VLMs works’ standard (Li et al., 2024; Cui
                                        et al., 2024) and use the 9 datasets they have used. Tab. 5 lists the details of these datasets
                                        and the partitioning method used in our experiments for each dataset.
Author Manuscript




                                                                                                    Table 5:
                                        The statistics of each dataset and the partitioning details used in our experiments

                                         Dataset            Training set size       Test set size    #Classes   #Clients   Sample Rate   Heterogeneity
                                         Flowers102                 4,093              2,463           102        10          100%        Pathological
                                         OxfordPets                 2,944              3,669           37         10          100%        Pathological
                                         Food101                    50,500            30,300           101        10          100%        Pathological
                                         Caltech101                 4,128              2,465           100        10          100%        Pathological
                                         DTD                        2,820              1,692           47         10          100%        Pathological
                                         Office-Caltech10           2,025               508            10         20          50%           Dir(0.3)
                                         DomainNet                  18,278             4,573           10         30          25%           Dir(0.3)
Author Manuscript




                                         CIFAR10                    50,000            10,000           10         100         10%           Dir(0.5)
                                         CIFAR100                   50,000            10,000           100        100         10%           Dir(0.5)


                       C. 2 pFedMoAP under differential privacy
                                        In pFedMoAP, clients remain unaware of the origin of non-local prompts, including which
                                        client they come from or the training round they were last updated in. Besides, the non-local
                                        prompts are downloaded after a KNN-based sparse selection process on the server. These


                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                               Page 16


                                       factors collectively make it extremely difficult for a client to infer the gradient associated
Author Manuscript




                                       with a prompt or the data it has been trained with, which largely mitigates the privacy risk.


                                                                                          Table 6:
                                       Performance under (ϵ, δ)-differential privacy on CLIP datasets under pathological non-IID
                                       setting.

                                                                                    Flowers102   OxfordPets     Food101     Caltech101      DTD

                                        Without differential privacy (fromTab. 1)
                                        PromptfL (Guo et al., 2023b)                72.80±1.14   90.79±0.61    77.31±1.64   89.70±1.99   54.11±0.22

                                        PromptFL+FedProx (Li et al.,                66.40±0.29   89.24±0.41    76.24±1.94   89.41±0.55   44.26±1.11
                                        2020b)
                                        pFedMoAP(ours)                              98.41±0.04   99.06±0.09    93.39±0.09   97.95±0.07   89.13±0.54

                                        With differential privacy (ϵ = 50)
Author Manuscript




                                        PromptFL (Guo et al., 2023b)                67.07±0.60   88.05±0.32    77.41±0.60   84.83±0.42   38.39±1.25

                                        PromptFL+FedProx (Li et al.,                66.22±0.63   87.78±0.61    77.27±0.59   84.68±0.64   39.43±1.11
                                        2020b)
                                        pFedMoAP(ours)                              98.34±0.06   99.08±0.02    93.36±0.04   97.90±0.08   89.99±0.49

                                        With differential privacy (ϵ = 25)

                                        PromptfL (Guo et al., 2023b)                64.25±1.10   86.26±1.07    76.84±0.66   85.00±1.59   38.19±0.66

                                        PromptFL+FedProx (Li et al.,                62.87±0.99   86.82±0.47    76.21±0.64   84.51±1.52   37.82±0.52
                                        2020b)
                                        pFedMoAP(ours)                              98.36±0.12   99.02±0.04    93.41±0.13   97.99±0.06   89.11±0.28

                                       Additionally, we evaluate how (ϵ, δ)-differential privacy (DP) (Dwork, 2006) affects the
                                       performance of pFedMoAP on CLIP datasets and compare its performance with PromptFL
Author Manuscript




                                       and PromptFL+FedProx. This is achieved by clipping the gradients of the prompts and
                                       adding noise to the uploaded prompts. We set the failure probability δ to be 0.05 and
                                       report the accuracy with the privacy budget ϵ being set to 50 and 25. The results in Tab.
                                       6 demonstrate that while the accuracy of PromptFL and PromptFL+FedProx significantly
                                       drop with privacy guarantees, DP’s impact in accuracy performance to pFedMoAP remains
                                       minimal for different privacy budgets. This is because the gating network in pFedMoAP is
                                       maintained locally for the entirety of the training process, and its multi-head attention layer
                                       learns proper transformations for the experts to align with the image features, mitigating the
                                       impact of the noise-contaminated prompts.

                       C. 3      Attention-based vs. linear projection-base gating network
                                                                                          Table 7:
Author Manuscript




                                       Comparison between the proposed attention-based gating network and the linear projection-
                                       based gating network

                                                                                    Flowers102   OxfordPets    Food101      Caltech101     DTD
                                        Linear projection-based (3 experts)         86.92±1.84   90.54±1.33   78.19±3.07    89.59±1.46   61.42±5.43
                                        Linear projection-based (10 experts)        69.64±4.57   52.78±6.88   77.39±3.29    86.57±1.96   30.42±7.14
                                        Attention-based, with aggregation           97.56±0.07   98.24±0.12   91.89±0.19    96.17±0.18   87.52±0.69




                                      Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                                    Page 17
Author Manuscript




                                                                                      Flowers102   OxfordPets      Food101    Caltech101        DTD
                                        Attention-based, without aggregation (ours)   98.41±0.04    99.06±0.09   93.39±0.09    97.95±0.07    89.13±0.54

                                       We compare the proposed attention-based gating network against the traditional linear
                                       projection-based gating network. The results are reported in Tab. 7 which strongly favor
                                       the attention-based approach, showing significantly better and more stable performance
                                       across all datasets. Notably, the linear projection-based approach struggles with larger
                                       numbers of experts (10 experts vs 3 experts), while the attention-based method maintains
                                       high performance. This is because the attention-based gating network 1) is more robust to
                                       adaptive experts; 2) serves as linear probing with more capacity; 3) leverages CLIP’s feature
                                       alignment with attention mechanism; and 4) is agnostic to experts’ order (detailed strength
                                       of attention-based approach over linear projection is described in Sec. 3.3).
Author Manuscript




                                       In addition, we choose to avoid aggregating the gating network due to its larger size. The
                                       gating network can be magnitudes larger than the prompts (see Tab. 9), which would largely
                                       increase the communication overhead. This design choice also aims for higher performance.
                                       As the deepest parameterized module of the entire model, the gating network should be fully
                                       “personalized” as opposed to “globalized” to achieve higher performance (Arivazhagan et
                                       al., 2019; Collins et al., 2021). The process of aggregating the gating network limits the
                                       level of its personalization, which yields worse results than our method that keeps the gating
                                       network locally (see Tab. 7).

                       C. 4      Additional ablation study
                                                                                            Table 8:
                                       Ablation study: impact of number of experts (K non-local experts + 1 local experts) to
Author Manuscript




                                       pFedMoAP on DomainNet

                                                           Clipart      Infograph      Painting    Quickdraw       Real        Sketch        Average

                                        K+1=5            47.20±0.30    46.80±0.48     32.54±0.42   37.67±0.52    31.50±0.65   36.09±0.92    38.63±0.29

                                        K + 1 = 10       46.89±1.07    46.15±0.95     32.76±0.42   37.70±1.02    31.94±0.83   36.84±1.21    38.71±0.45

                                        K + 1 = 15       47.36±1.12    46.29±0.83     32.76±0.57   37.76±0.98    31.78±0.72   36.67±1.03    38.77±0.38

                                        K + 1 = 20       47.49±0.64    46.73±0.71     32.74±0.84   37.16±0.34    31.02±0.59   37.67±0.72    38.80±0.11

                                        K + 1 = 25       47.56±0.92    46.89±1.30     32.23±0.97   38.03±1.14    31.66±0.77   36.79±1.02    38.86±0.43

                                        K + 1 = 30       47.56±0.87    46.64±1.38     32.19±0.89   37.93±1.22    31.80±0.95   37.01±1.08    38.85±0.43


                                       Number of experts. We present an ablation study examining how the number of experts
                                       (K non-local experts + 1 local expert) affects pFedMoAP’s performance on the DomainNet
Author Manuscript




                                       dataset. The results in Tab. 8 show that the average performance gradually improves as
                                       the number of experts increases from 5 to 30. Fig. 5 plots the trend of performance with
                                       different numbers of experts from 5 to 40 on CIFAR10. For both datasets, it plateaus around
                                       larger numbers of experts, suggesting that while having multiple experts is beneficial, there’s
                                       a point of diminishing returns. This is because the extra downloaded experts (selected last
                                       by our KNN-based expert selection mechanism) by a client are trained from the data that is



                                      Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                         Page 18


                                  distinctly distributed from the client’s local data distribution. This shows that the proposed
Author Manuscript




                                  method does not require an excessive number of experts to achieve high performance.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                  Figure 5:
                                  The impact of the number of experts on CIFAR10 with 100 clients


                                                                                    Table 9:
                                  Ablation study: the impact of output dimension of CLIP backbone to pFedMoAP on CLIP
                                  datasets. For dfeature < 1024, a pooling layer is added after the dfeature = 1024 feature from the
                                  backbone to reduce the size of the gating network as mentioned in Sec. 3.3

                                                       Gating network size   Flowers102    OxfordPets     Food101     Caltech101     DTD

                                   dfeature = 32              4.2K            97.28±0.18   98.75±0.32    93.42±0.08   97.37±0.08   88.61±0.89

                                   dfeature = 64              16.6K           98.55±0.10   98.91±0.23    93.89±0.12   97.75±0.12   89.96±0.09
Author Manuscript




                                   dfeature = 128             66.0K           98.41±0.04   99.06±0.09    93.39±0.09   97.95±0.07   89.13±0.54

                                   dfeature = 256            263.2K           99.01±0.05   98.88±0.21    92.49±0.20   97.93±0.07   90.88±0.16

                                   dfeature = 512             1.1M            98.18±0.38   96.85±0.22    90.34±0.31   96.99±0.11   89.65±0.10

                                   dfeature = 1024            4.2M            98.11±0.33   95.81±0.84    89.20±0.37   96.82±0.26   89.03±0.14




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                              Page 19


                                  Feature dimension. We investigate the impact of the output dimension (dfeature) of the
Author Manuscript




                                  CLIP backbone on pFedMoAP’s performance across CLIP datasets. The study shows that
                                  moderate feature dimensions (128–256) generally yield the best results, with dfeature = 128 or
                                  256 consistently performing well across all datasets. Lower feature dimensions (dfeature = 32
                                  or 64) have less capacity, failing to unlock the full potential of the pre-trained VLM.
                                  High dimensions (dfeature = 128 or 1024) significantly increase the size of the gating
                                  network. With less training data on a client, high dimensions lead to overparameterized
                                  gating network, resulting in slightly degraded performance. This suggests that a relatively
                                  compact feature dimension is sufficient and possibly preferable for the attention-based
                                  gating mechanism.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                  Figure 6:
                                  Contribution of the experts based on averaged attention score across all test images. The first
                                  five charts are for CLIP datasets, for which there are 10 clients in each dataset. The last chart
                                  is for DomainNet with a total of 30 clients.

                                  Visualization of contribution for each expert. To have a clear understanding of how
                                  the experts contribute to the MoE text feature (T MoE), we visualize the contribution of the
Author Manuscript




                                  local and non-local experts towards it. This is achieved by taking the following steps. For
                                  each image in a client’s test set, we compute the attention score (softmax of scaled dot
                                  product between the image and text features (Vaswani, 2017)) for each expert (local and
                                  non-local) through the multi-head attention layer in the proposed gating network. The scores
                                  from non-local experts are sorted in a descending manner. All scores are averaged over the
                                  test set across all clients. We visualize the averaged scores under 6 datasets in Fig. 6. From
                                  this figure, we can see that 1) every expert has a non-trivial contribution to T MoE, the text



                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                 Page 20


                                  feature generated from the MoE, indicating that each expert is indispensable in the whole
Author Manuscript




                                  design; 2) as a result of the minimization, the contribution from the local experts to the
                                  MoE is not the highest. This is reasonable since besides the T MoE, Eq. (10)’s second term
                                  optimizes the text feature from the local expert itself (T L) based on the image feature, which
                                  directly contributes to the loss; and 3) although not the highest, the contribution from the
                                  local expert to the MoE is still among the highest ones as it is the only expert that is updated
                                  during local training with fixed non-local prompts.


                       References
                                  Achiam Josh, Adler Steven, Agarwal Sandhini, Ahmad Lama, Akkaya Ilge, Aleman Florencia Leoni,
                                    Almeida Diogo, Altenschmidt Janko, Altman Sam, Anadkat Shyamal, et al. Gpt-4 technical report.
                                    arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
                                  Arivazhagan Manoj Ghuhan, Aggarwal Vinay, Singh Aaditya Kumar, and Choudhary Sunav. Federated
Author Manuscript




                                    learning with personalization layers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.00818, 2019.
                                  Bai Jinze, Bai Shuai, Chu Yunfei, Cui Zeyu, Dang Kai, Deng Xiaodong, Fan Yang, Ge Wenbin, Han
                                    Yu, Huang Fei, et al. Qwen technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16609, 2023.
                                  Bossard Lukas, Guillaumin Matthieu, and Van Gool Luc. Food-101-mining discriminative components
                                    with random forests. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich,
                                    Switzerland, September 6–12, 2014, Proceedings, Part VI 13, pp. 446–461. Springer, 2014.
                                  Cai Zhongyi, Shi Ye, Huang Wei, and Wang Jingya. Fed-CO2: Cooperation of online and offline
                                    models for severe data heterogeneity in federated learning. Advances in Neural Information
                                    Processing Systems, 36, 2024.
                                  Cheng Gary, Chadha Karan, and Duchi John. Fine-tuning is fine in federated learning. arXiv preprint
                                    arXiv:2108.07313, 3, 2021.
                                  Cimpoi Mircea, Maji Subhransu, Kokkinos Iasonas, Mohamed Sammy, and Vedaldi Andrea.
                                    Describing textures in the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
                                    pattern recognition, pp. 3606–3613, 2014.
                                  Clark Aidan, de Las Casas Diego, Guy Aurelia, Mensch Arthur, Paganini Michela, Hoffmann Jordan,
Author Manuscript




                                    Damoc Bogdan, Hechtman Blake, Cai Trevor, Borgeaud Sebastian, et al. Unified scaling laws for
                                    routed language models. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4057–4086. PMLR,
                                    2022.
                                  Collins Liam, Hassani Hamed, Mokhtari Aryan, and Shakkottai Sanjay. Exploiting shared
                                    representations for personalized federated learning. In International conference on machine
                                    learning, pp. 2089–2099. PMLR, 2021.
                                  Cui Tianyu, Li Hongxia, Wang Jingya, and Shi Ye. Harmonizing generalization and personalization
                                      in federated prompt learning. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.
                                      URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=YYwERRXsJW.
                                  Deng Yuyang, Kamani Mohammad Mahdi, and Mahdavi Mehrdad. Adaptive personalized federated
                                      learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.13461, 2020.
                                  Dun Chen, Hipolito Garcia Mirian, Zheng Guoqing, Awadallah Ahmed, Sim Robert, Kyrillidis
                                      Anastasios, and Dimitriadis Dimitrios. Fedjets: Efficient just-in-time personalization with
                                      federated mixture of experts. In R0-FoMo: Robustness of Few-shot and Zero-shot Learning in
Author Manuscript




                                      Large Foundation Models, 2023.
                                  Dwork Cynthia. Differential privacy. In International colloquium on automata, languages, and
                                      programming, pp. 1–12. Springer, 2006.
                                  Fei-Fei Li. Learning generative visual models from few training examples. In Workshop on
                                      Generative-Model Based Vision, IEEE Proc. CVPR, 2004, 2004.
                                  Feng Chun-Mei, Li Bangjun, Xu Xinxing, Liu Yong, Fu Huazhu, and Zuo Wangmeng. Learning
                                      Federated Visual Prompt in Null Space for MRI Reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
                                      Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 8064–8073, 2023.




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                   Page 21


                                  Gong Boqing, Shi Yuan, Sha Fei, and Grauman Kristen. Geodesic flow kernel for unsupervised
                                      domain adaptation. In 2012 IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp.
Author Manuscript




                                      2066–2073. IEEE, 2012.
                                  Guo Binbin, Mei Yuan, Xiao Danyang, and Wu Weigang. Pfl-moe: personalized federated learning
                                      based on mixture of experts. In Web and Big Data: 5th International Joint Conference, APWeb-
                                      WAIM 2021, Guangzhou, China, August 23–25, 2021, Proceedings, Part I 5, pp. 480–486.
                                      Springer, 2021.
                                  Guo Tao, Guo Song, and Wang Junxiao. pFedPrompt: Learning Personalized Prompt for Vision-
                                      Language Models in Federated Learning. In Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2023, pp.
                                      1364–1374, 2023a.
                                  Guo Tao, Guo Song, Wang Junxiao, Tang Xueyang, and Xu Wenchao. PromptFL: Let federated
                                      participants cooperatively learn prompts instead of models-federated learning in age of foundation
                                      model. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2023b.
                                  Hazimeh Hussein, Zhao Zhe, Chowdhery Aakanksha, Sathiamoorthy Maheswaran, Chen Yihua,
                                      Mazumder Rahul, Hong Lichan, and Chi Ed. Dselect-k: Differentiable selection in the mixture
                                      of experts with applications to multi-task learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Author Manuscript




                                      Systems, 34:29335–29347, 2021.
                                  Hsu Tzu-Ming Harry, Qi Hang, and Brown Matthew. Measuring the effects of non-identical data
                                      distribution for federated visual classification. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06335, 2019.
                                  Huang Yutao, Chu Lingyang, Zhou Zirui, Wang Lanjun, Liu Jiangchuan, Pei Jian, and Zhang Yong.
                                      Personalized cross-silo federated learning on non-iid data. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference
                                      on artificial intelligence, volume 35, pp. 7865–7873, 2021.
                                  Jia Chao, Yang Yinfei, Xia Ye, Chen Yi-Ting, Parekh Zarana, Pham Hieu, Le Quoc, Sung Yun-Hsuan,
                                      Li Zhen, and Duerig Tom. Scaling up visual and vision-language representation learning with
                                      noisy text supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp. 4904–4916. PMLR,
                                      2021.
                                  Jiang Albert Q, Sablayrolles Alexandre, Roux Antoine, Mensch Arthur, Savary Blanche, Bamford
                                      Chris, Chaplot Devendra Singh, de las Casas Diego, Hanna Emma Bou, Bressand Florian, et al.
                                      Mixtral of experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.04088, 2024.
                                  Kairouz Peter, Brendan McMahan H, Avent Brendan, Bellet Aurélien, Bennis Mehdi, Bhagoji Arjun
                                      Nitin, Bonawitz Kallista, Charles Zachary, Cormode Graham, Cummings Rachel, et al. Advances
Author Manuscript




                                      and open problems in federated learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.04977, 2019.
                                  Khattak Muhammad Uzair, Rasheed Hanoona, Maaz Muhammad, Khan Salman, and Khan Fahad
                                      Shahbaz. Maple: Multi-modal prompt learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
                                      Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19113–19122, 2023a.
                                  Khattak Muhammad Uzair, Wasim Syed Talal, Naseer Muzammal, Khan Salman, Yang Ming-Hsuan,
                                      and Khan Fahad Shahbaz. Self-regulating Prompts: Foundational model adaptation without
                                      forgetting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
                                      15190–15200, 2023b.
                                  Kulkarni Viraj, Kulkarni Milind, and Pant Aniruddha. Survey of personalization techniques for
                                      federated learning. In 2020 Fourth World Conference on Smart Trends in Systems, Security and
                                      Sustainability (WorldS4), pp. 794–797. IEEE, 2020.
                                  Li Hongxia, Cai Zhongyi, Wang Jingya, Tang Jiangnan, Ding Weiping, Lin Chin-Teng, and Shi
                                      Ye. FedTP: Federated Learning by Transformer Personalization. IEEE Transactions on Neural
                                      Networks and Learning Systems, 2023.
Author Manuscript




                                  Li Hongxia, Huang Wei, Wang Jingya, and Shi Ye. Global and local prompts cooperation via optimal
                                      transport for federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
                                      and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
                                  Li Tian, Sahu Anit Kumar, Talwalkar Ameet, and Smith Virginia. Federated learning: Challenges,
                                      methods, and future directions. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 37(3):50–60, 2020a.
                                  Li Tian, Sahu Anit Kumar, Zaheer Manzil, Sanjabi Maziar, Talwalkar Ameet, and Smith Virginia.
                                      Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. Proceedings of Machine learning and systems,
                                      2:429–450, 2020b.




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                   Page 22


                                  Li Tian, Hu Shengyuan, Beirami Ahmad, and Smith Virginia. Ditto: Fair and robust federated
                                      learning through personalization. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 6357–
Author Manuscript




                                      6368. PMLR, 2021a.
                                  Li Xiaoxiao, Jiang Meirui, Zhang Xiaofei, Kamp Michael, and Dou Qi. FedBN: Federated learning on
                                      non-iid features via local batch normalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07623, 2021b.
                                  Liang Paul Pu, Liu Terrance, Ziyin Liu, Allen Nicholas B, Auerbach Randy P, Brent David,
                                      Salakhutdinov Ruslan, and Morency Louis-Philippe. Think locally, act globally: Federated
                                      learning with local and global representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.01523, 2020.
                                  Luo Jun and Wu Shandong. Adapt to adaptation: Learning personalization for cross-silo federated
                                      learning. In IJCAI: proceedings of the conference, volume 2022, pp. 2166. NIH Public Access,
                                      2022. [PubMed: 37193322]
                                  Luo Jun, Mendieta Matias, Chen Chen, and Wu Shandong. Pgfed: Personalize each client’s global
                                      objective for federated learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
                                      Computer Vision, pp. 3946–3956, 2023.
                                  Masoudnia Saeed and Ebrahimpour Reza. Mixture of experts: a literature survey. Artificial Intelligence
                                      Review, 42:275–293, 2014.
Author Manuscript




                                  McMahan Brendan, Moore Eider, Ramage Daniel, Hampson Seth, and Aguera y Arcas Blaise.
                                      Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from decentralized data. In Artificial
                                      intelligence and statistics, pp. 1273–1282. PMLR, 2017.
                                  Nilsback Maria-Elena and Zisserman Andrew. Automated flower classification over a large number of
                                      classes. In 2008 Sixth Indian conference on computer vision, graphics & image processing, pp.
                                      722–729. IEEE, 2008.
                                  Pan Bikang, Huang Wei, and Shi Ye. Federated learning from vision-language foundation models:
                                      Theoretical analysis and method. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.19610, 2024.
                                  Parkhi Omkar M, Vedaldi Andrea, Zisserman Andrew, and Jawahar CV. Cats and dogs. In 2012 IEEE
                                      conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 3498–3505. IEEE, 2012.
                                  Peng Xingchao, Bai Qinxun, Xia Xide, Huang Zijun, Saenko Kate, and Wang Bo. Moment matching
                                      for multi-source domain adaptation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
                                      computer vision, pp. 1406–1415, 2019.
                                  Radford Alec, Kim Jong Wook, Hallacy Chris, Ramesh Aditya, Goh Gabriel, Agarwal Sandhini,
Author Manuscript




                                      Sastry Girish, Askell Amanda, Mishkin Pamela, Clark Jack, et al. Learning transferable visual
                                      models from natural language supervision. In International conference on machine learning, pp.
                                      8748–8763. PMLR, 2021.
                                  Reisser Matthias, Louizos Christos, Gavves Efstratios, and Welling Max. Federated mixture of experts.
                                      arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.06724, 2021.
                                  Sahu Anit Kumar, Li Tian, Sanjabi Maziar, Zaheer Manzil, Talwalkar Ameet, and Smith Virginia.
                                      On the convergence of federated optimization in heterogeneous networks. arXiv preprint
                                      arXiv:1812.06127, 3:3, 2018.
                                  Shazeer Noam, Mirhoseini Azalia, Maziarz Krzysztof, Davis Andy, Le Quoc, Hinton Geoffrey, and
                                      Dean Jeff. Outrageously large neural networks: The sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts layer. arXiv
                                      preprint arXiv:1701.06538, 2017.
                                  Su Shangchao, Yang Mingzhao, Li Bin, and Xue Xiangyang. Cross-domain federated adaptive prompt
                                      tuning for clip. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.07864, 2022.
                                  Sun Guangyu, Mendieta Matias, Luo Jun, Wu Shandong, and Chen Chen. Fedperfix: Towards
                                      partial model personalization of vision transformers in federated learning. In Proceedings of the
Author Manuscript




                                      IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 4988–4998, 2023.
                                  Tan Alysa Ziying, Yu Han, Cui Lizhen, and Yang Qiang. Towards personalized federated learning.
                                      IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2022.
                                  Vaswani A. Attention is all you need. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017.
                                  Xie Luyuan, Lin Manqing, Luan Tianyu, Li Cong, Fang Yuejian, Shen Qingni, and Wu Zhonghai.
                                      Mh-pflid: Model heterogeneous personalized federated learning via injection and distillation for
                                      medical data analysis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06822, 2024.




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                  Page 23


                                  Yi Kai, Gazagnadou Nidham, Richtárik Peter, and Lyu Lingjuan. Fedp3: Federated personalized and
                                      privacy-friendly network pruning under model heterogeneity. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09816,
Author Manuscript




                                      2024a.
                                  Yi Liping, Yu Han, Ren Chao, Zhang Heng, Wang Gang, Liu Xiaoguang, and Li Xiaoxiao. pfedmoe:
                                      Data-level personalization with mixture of experts for model-heterogeneous personalized federated
                                      learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01350, 2024b.
                                  Zhou Kaiyang, Yang Jingkang, Loy Chen Change, and Liu Ziwei. Conditional prompt learning for
                                      vision-language models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
                                      Pattern Recognition, pp. 16816–16825, 2022a.
                                  Zhou Kaiyang, Yang Jingkang, Loy Chen Change, and Liu Ziwei. Learning to prompt for vision-
                                      language models. International Journal of Computer Vision, 130(9):2337–2348, 2022b.
                                  Zhou Yanqi, Lei Tao, Liu Hanxiao, Du Nan, Huang Yanping, Zhao Vincent, Dai Andrew M, Le
                                      Quoc V, Laudon James, et al. Mixture-of-experts with expert choice routing. Advances in Neural
                                      Information Processing Systems, 35:7103–7114, 2022c.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                        Page 24
Author Manuscript




                                  Figure 1:
                                  Schematic diagram of employing Mixture of Experts into federated learning. We facilitate
                                  the sharing of pre-aggregated prompts thanks to their lightweight nature. Each client
                                  downloads the pre-aggregated prompts trained on the remaining two clients through the
Author Manuscript




                                  server, keeping them fixed locally as non-local experts.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                          Page 25
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                  Figure 2:
                                  Workflow of pFedMoAP at client i. The client first computes the non-local text features
                                  using the non-local prompt experts. As training progresses, it then calculates the local text
                                  features. Taking class 3 as an example, both local and non-local text features are input into
                                  the attention-based gating network as both key and value, while image features serve as the
                                  query. This process generates enhanced text features. Matching socres are derived from two
                                  sources: local text features and MoE-enhanced text features. These scores are then combined
                                  through weighted averaging to produce the final logits.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                     Page 26
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                  Figure 3:
                                  Ablation study on the number of shots.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                     Page 27
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                  Figure 4:
                                  Ablation study on the coefficient for the logits from local prompt, λ.
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                 Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                         Page 28




                                                                                 Table 1:
                    Few-shot performance on CLIP datasets under pathological non-IID setting.
Author Manuscript




                                                                    Flowers102    OxfordPets     Food101     Caltech101     DTD

                     ZS-CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)                 62.17±0.12     84.47±0.01   75.27±0.05   85.14±0.24   40.21±0.12

                     CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b)                      70.14±0.76     83.21±1.30   70.43±2.42   87.37±0.44   44.23±0.63

                     PromptFL (Guo et al., 2023b)                   72.80±1.14     90.79±0.61   77.31±1.64   89.70±1.99   54.11±0.22

                     PromptFL+FT (Cheng et al., 2021)               72.31±0.91     91.23±0.50   77.16±1.56   89.70±0.25   53.74±1.36

                     Prompt+FedPer (Arivazhagan et al., 2019)       72.11±1.35     89.50±1.62   71.29±1.87   86.72±1.45   50.23±0.82

                     Prompt+FedProx (Li et al., 2020b)              66.40±0.29     89.24±0.41   76.24±1.94   89.41±0.55   44.26±1.11

                     Prompt+FedAMP (Huang et al., 2021)             69.10±0.13     80.21±0.44   74.48±1.71   87.31±1.60   47.16±0.92

                     pFedPrompt (Guo et al., 2023a)                 86.46±0.15     91.84±0.41   92.26±1.34   96.54±1.31   77.14±0.09

                     FedOTP (Li et al., 2024)                       96.23±0.44     98.82±0.11   92.73±0.15   97.02±0.36   87.64±0.70

                     pFedMoAP (λ = 0.0)                             97.61±0.11     94.83±0.65   86.71±0.15   95.71±0.37   85.64±0.34
Author Manuscript




                     pFedMoAP (λ = 0.5)                             98.41±0.04     99.06±0.09   93.39±0.09   97.95±0.07   89.13±0.54
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                           Page 29




                                                                               Table 2:
                    Results on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 with label shift with (Dir(α = 0.5)) partition into 100 clients
Author Manuscript




                                                              CIFAR10      CIFAR10

                     ZS CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)          53.46±0.21   32.68±0.00

                     CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b)               80.84±0.39   48.74±0.17

                     PromptFL (Guo et al., 2023b)            73.29±0.37   45.00±0.62

                     Prompt+FedProx (Li et al., 2020b)       73.32±0.34   45.63±0.75

                     pFedMoAP                                83.46±0.53   53.42±0.22
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                               Page 30




                                                                             Table 3:
                    Results on DomainNet with feature shift and label shift with Dir(α = 0.3) partition into 5 clients/domain
Author Manuscript




                                              Clipart      Infograph     Painting    Quickdraw         Real        Sketch       Average

                     ZS CLIP                 9.18±0.62    10.03±0.16     9.93±0.51    10.25±0.40    9.90±1.30     9.54±1.13     9.81±0.30

                     CoOp                   43.84±3.51    45.72±0.85    29.94±0.46    36.83±1.17    31.64±0.49    33.97±0.78   36.99±0.79

                     PromptFL               27.63±16.41   27.69±18.07   21.62±8.34   23.45±13.49   20.62±11.03    25.90±8.10   24.48±12.52

                     Prompt+FedProx         22.23±15.42   21.75±17.00   18.58±8.15   19.40±12.59   17.17±10.25    22.49±8.44   20.27±11.83

                     pFedMoAP               47.49±0.64    46.73±0.71    32.74±0.84    37.16±0.34    31.02±0.59    37.67±0.72   38.80±0.11
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                     Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
                    Luo et al.                                                                                                  Page 31




                                                                               Table 4:
                    Results on Office-Caltech10 with feature shift and label shift with Dir(α = 0.3) partition into 5 clients/domain
Author Manuscript




                                                              Amazon        Caltech        DSLR        Webcam       Average

                     ZS-CLIP (Radford et al., 2021)           9.83±1.63    10.67±0.89   10.89±1.40    6.20±3.84    9.40±0.77

                     CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b)               30.29±3.64    35.88±1.30   29.89±5.15    33.43±2.25   32.37±1.81

                     PromptFL (Guo et al., 2023b             21.08±9.60   23.72±12.21   22.94±7.96    25.88±7.72   23.41±9.06

                     Prompt+FedProx (Li et al., 2020b)       18.64±8.58   19.56±11.59   20.89±7.38    22.96±7.56   20.51±8.48

                     pFedMoAP                                35.47±1.37    37.45±1.33   45.11±3.14    35.22±1.04   38.31±1.21
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript




                                       Int Conf Learn Represent. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2026 February 14.
